## Concepts
A web browser is a software application that enables a user to access and display web pages or other online content through its graphical user interface. Its common user interface elements are:
  - Address bar for inserting a URI
  - Back and forward buttons
  - Bookmarking options
  - Refresh and stop buttons for refreshing or stopping the loading of current documents
  - Home button that takes you to your home page

In the higher level structure, those are main components of a browser:
  - **The user interface**: this includes the address bar, back/forward button, bookmarking menu, etc. Every part of the browser display except the window where you see the requested page.
  - **The browser engine**: marshals actions between the UI and the rendering engine.
  - **The rendering engine**: responsible for displaying requested content. For example if the requested content is HTML, the rendering engine parses HTML and CSS, and displays the parsed content on the screen.
  - **Networking**: for network calls such as HTTP requests, using different implementations for different platform behind a platform-independent interface.
  - **UI backend**: used for drawing basic widgets like combo boxes and windows. This backend exposes a generic interface that is not platform specific. Underneath it uses operating system user interface methods.
  - **JavaScript interpreter**: Used to parse and execute JavaScript code.
  - **Data storage**: This is a persistence layer. The browser may need to save all sorts of data locally, such as cookies. Browsers also support storage mechanisms such as localStorage, IndexedDB, WebSQL and FileSystem.


## How it works?
The browser working flow follows these steps:
### 1. Navigation
Navigation is the first step in loading a web page. It occurs whenever a user requests a page by entering a URL into the address bar, clicking a link, submitting a form, as well as other actions. The navigation includes three small steps:
#### a. DNS Lookup
The first step of navigating to a web page is finding where the assets for that page are located. If you navigate to https://example.com, the HTML page is located on the server with IP address of 93.184.216.34. If you've never visited this site, a DNS lookup must happen.
#### b. TCP Handshake
Once the IP address is known, the browser sets up a connection to the server via a TCP three-way handshake. This mechanism is designed so that two entities attempting to communicate—in this case the browser and web server—can negotiate the parameters of the network TCP socket connection before transmitting data, often over HTTPS.
#### c. TLS Negotiation
For secure connections established over HTTPS, another "handshake" is required. This handshake, or rather the TLS negotiation, determines which cipher will be used to encrypt the communication, verifies the server, and establishes that a secure connection is in place before beginning the actual transfer of data. This requires three more round trips to the server before the request for content is actually sent.
### 2. Response
Once we have an established connection to a web server, the browser sends an initial HTTP GET request on behalf of the user, which for websites is most often an HTML file. Once the server receives the request, it will reply with relevant response headers and the contents of the HTML.
#### a. TCP Slow Start / 14KB rule
The first response packet will be 14KB. This is part of TCP slow start, an algorithm which balances the speed of a network connection. Slow start gradually increases the amount of data transmitted until the network's maximum bandwidth can be determined.
#### b. Congestion control
As the server sends data in TCP packets, the user's client confirms delivery by returning acknowledgements, or ACKs. The connection has a limited capacity depending on hardware and network conditions. If the server sends too many packets too quickly, they will be dropped. Meaning, there will be no acknowledgement. The server registers this as missing ACKs. Congestion control algorithms use this flow of sent packets and ACKs to determine a send rate.
### 3. Parsing
Once the browser receives the first chunk of data, it can begin parsing the information received. Parsing is the step the browser takes to turn the data it receives over the network into the DOM and CSSOM, which is used by the renderer to paint a page to the screen.
#### a. Building the DOM tree
The DOM tree was build follow 5 steps, those are sequence of steps(called Critical rendering path) the browser goes through to convert the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript into pixels on the screen.
- Document Object Model
- CSS Object Model
- Render Tree
- Layout
- Paint
#### b. Preload scanner
While the browser builds the DOM tree, this process occupies the main thread. As this happens, the preload scanner will parse through the content available and request high priority resources like CSS, JavaScript, and web fonts. Thanks to the preload scanner, we don't have to wait until the parser finds a reference to an external resource to request it. It will retrieve resources in the background so that by the time the main HTML parser reaches requested assets, they may possibly already be in flight, or have been downloaded. The optimizations the preload scanner provides reduce blockages.
#### c. Building the CSSOM
The second step in the critical rendering path is processing CSS and building the CSSOM tree. The CSS object model is similar to the DOM. The DOM and CSSOM are both trees. They are independent data structures. The browser converts the CSS rules into a map of styles it can understand and work with. The browser goes through each rule set in the CSS, creating a tree of nodes with parent, child, and sibling relationships based on the CSS selectors.
#### d. Other Processes
- **JavaScript Compilation:** While the CSS is being parsed and the CSSOM created, other assets, including JavaScript files, are downloading (thanks to the preload scanner). JavaScript is interpreted, compiled, parsed and executed. The scripts are parsed into abstract syntax trees. Some browser engines take the Abstract Syntax Tree and pass it into an interpreter, outputting bytecode which is executed on the main thread. This is known as JavaScript compilation.
- **Building the Accessibility Tree:** The browser also builds an accessibility tree that assistive devices use to parse and interpret content. The accessibility object model (AOM) is like a semantic version of the DOM. The browser updates the accessibility tree when the DOM is updated. The accessibility tree is not modifiable by assistive technologies themselves.
### 4. Render
Rendering steps include style, layout, paint and, in some cases, compositing.
#### a. Style
The third step in the critical rendering path is combining the DOM and CSSOM into a render tree. The computed style tree, or render tree, construction starts with the root of the DOM tree, traversing each visible node.
#### b. Layout
The fourth step in the critical rendering path is running layout on the render tree to compute the geometry of each node. Layout is the process by which the width, height, and location of all the nodes in the render tree are determined, plus the determination of the size and position of each object on the page. Reflow is any subsequent size and position determination of any part of the page or the entire document.
#### c. Paint
The last step in the critical rendering path is painting the individual nodes to the screen, the first occurrence of which is called the first meaningful paint. In the painting or rasterization phase, the browser converts each box calculated in the layout phase to actual pixels on the screen. Painting involves drawing every visual part of an element to the screen, including text, colors, borders, shadows, and replaced elements like buttons and images. The browser needs to do this super quickly.
#### d. Compositing
When sections of the document are drawn in different layers, overlapping each other, compositing is necessary to ensure they are drawn to the screen in the right order and the content is rendered correctly.
### 5. Interactivity
Once the main thread is done painting the page, you would think we would be "all set." That isn't necessarily the case. If the load includes JavaScript, that was correctly deferred, and only executed after the onload event fires, the main thread might be busy, and not available for scrolling, touch, and other interactions.
