### What’s a markup language ?

A markup language is a computer language that uses tags to define elements within a document. It is human-readable, meaning markup files contain standard words, rather than typical programming syntax. While several markup languages exist, the two most popular are HTML and XML .

### What’s a programming language ?

A programming language is a set of commands, instructions, and other syntax use to create a software program. Languages that programmers use to write code are called `high-level languages`. This code can be compiled into a `low-level language`, which is recognized directly by the computer hardware.

And for the lazy ones who don't wanna read the definition of each one here’s the difference between them. The difference between a programming and a markup language?

The main difference between markup language and programming language is that a markup language defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable while a programming language provides a set of commands and syntax that can be used to write computer programs which are understood by the computer.

### The difference between a programming and a markup language ?

The main difference between markup language and programming language is that a markup language defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable while a programming language provides a set of commands and syntax that can be used to write computer programs which are understood by the computer.

### What is HTML ?

HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) is the computer language that facilitates website creation. The language, which has code words and syntax just like any other language. It is the set of markup symbols or codes inserted into a file intended for display on the Internet. The markup tells web browsers how to display a web page’s words and images.

### How does HTML work?

HTML structures content on a page and instructs browsers how to display that content. While HTML can be used alone, it is usually paired with cascading style sheets (CSS) to systematically control the web page’s appearance and behaviour and programming languages such as JavaScript to extend its functionality and interactivity.

### Pros and cons of HTML ?

#### What are the advantages of HTML?

- Easy. It is super easy to learn even for school kids.
- Syntax. The code is clean to write and follow.
- Simplicity. The coding structure is very simple to understand.
- Free. It is free for the use which means you don’t have to pay for anything.
- Industry Standard. Accepted by all modern browsers like Chrome, Safari, Opera, etc.
- Independent. It is a platform-independent language which means it can work across all devices.
- Embed Media. Easily embed audio, video, photos, and other types of media files.
- Hypertext. Link to any page internal on a website or external on different websites.
- Community. It has a huge community online if you want any kind of support.
- Templates. Don’t want to code from scratch then there are templates available for everything and for free.

#### Disadvantages of HTML ?

- Bulkiness. Sometimes there can be lots of pages that can be hard to handle
- Security. It is not secure on its own. You need third-party services to provide more security.
- Limitations. Alone HTML does not have many capabilities. Html alone can create basic web pages nothing much.
- Write Code. You have to write code for the simplest web pages. It can be a problem if a website has a lot of pages.
- Not Centralized. Each page should be programmed separately. It one of the biggest disadvantages.
- Dynamic Pages. Creating dynamic pages are hard. By default all HTML pages are static.( The main difference between static and dynamic websites is that the content on a static website stays the same, while Information on a dynamic site can shift.)

